Okay, this is Ron Shorn interviewing Torrance
Johnson in Boulder, Colorado on October 20th,
1993. Torrance, for the record, could you give us
your full name? Torrance V. Johnson. And when and
where were you born? In New York, December 1st,
1944. New York City? Actually on Long Island,
Rockville Center. When did you first get
interested in astronomy? Oh, I was interested in
astronomy as a kid. Actually, I was more
interested in dinosaurs. But as I got interested
in physics and things like that, I got interested
in telescopes and astronomy along with that. I
used to go to the planetarium in both New York when
we lived there, and we also lived out in San
Francisco. And folks used to take me to the
planetarium every year. every month for new
shows. So I've been interested pretty much since I
was a small kid.
Where did you go to undergraduate school?
Washington University in St. Louis. And what was
your major? Physics with a pretty strong minor in
geology and geophysics. Why did you pick that
university? It's halfway between Long Island and
San Francisco, of course. Well, we moved around
when I was a kid. My father was in the Coast Guard,
and About the time I was in high school, he retired
from the Coast Guard and went back to school at
Mississippi Southern University, which was,
Mississippi was where my mother came from. And
when time came around to get to college, we were
looking for good scholarships and things, and I'd
never been to the Midwest before. Washington U had
a very strong program. going out aggressively
recruiting smart people from different parts of
the country. We were the first class that had more
than 50% streetcar college kids from the local
parts of St. Louis. Did you take any astronomy as an
undergraduate? No, there wasn't an astronomy
department at Washington U. What we had was some
physicists who were engaged in different types of
what is generally called astronomy. We had people
interested in X-ray, gamma ray, and the emerging
field of infrared astronomy at that time. In fact,
my interest in that type of astronomy was piqued by
doing a senior project for Dr. Friedman there. And
what I did was researched a lot of the early work in
infrared astronomy being done out at Caltech by
Gary Neugebauer and Bruce Murray, and tried to
help think about how they might set up some similar
infrared work at Washington U. When did you get
your bachelor's degree? 1966. And then where did
you go for your graduate work? I went out to Caltech
and I was influenced partially by those working
and reading with those papers on infrared
astronomy. I thought it was sort of neat to couple
the ideas of astronomy and geology together and I
was interested in the infrared telescopic work
that was being done out at Caltech. And right at
that time I sent my my application into the physics
department, since I was in the physics
department. And I wasn't really good enough in
physics to get into the Caltech physics
department, but they bumped it over to geology,
where Bruce was trying to put together a program of
people working quantitatively with using
astronomy and physics to understand planetary
problems. What did you do your doctoral
dissertation on, and who under? I was a student of
Bruce Murray's at Caltech from the time I got
there, and I worked on doing spectrophotometric
studies of the Galilean satellites. Bruce was
quite good at, I think, handing over really good
problems to his students. I had a survey course
from Bruce where he kind of laid out a lot of things
about solar system astronomy to us, And he said,
gee, nothing's known about the Galilean
satellites of Jupiter. Why don't you work on that?
And what he had done was asked me to review for the
class everything that was known about the
Galilean satellites. I accomplished that in
about 15 minutes at the time. Now we can have a whole
conference on one aspect of Io for a week. And the
other thing that came together at that time was
that Tom McCord was in the midst of his thesis work
there also working for Bruce Murray. And he had
developed and built his dual beam photometer for
doing multispectral observations at anywhere
from 12 to 24 different wavelengths of different
areas on the moon. And Bruce thought it would be a
neat idea to apply that instrumentation to the
Galilean satellite studies. So I started working
with Tom, helping him with his lunar studies, and I
got involved in lunar astronomy at that point
also. And then as Tom phased out of that, went to
MIT, I took over the equipment, if you will, and
started working on that for a whole apparition
doing spectrophotometric studies of the
Galilean satellites. When did you complete your
PhD, or when did they throw you out? I left for MIT in
1969 to take up a post-doctoral job with Tom
McCord, who'd set up a lab there. And so I
concentrated on getting my thesis published,
which I actually got a little bit of it published as
opposed to some people. and continuing to expand
the work that Tom and I had started on both the moon,
satellites, and asteroids with his group that Tom
had started at MIT. So I arrived there in the fall of
69. How did you make that connection with
McCartan? Well, as I said, I've been working with
him. He was, in essence, my mentor amongst the
graduate students at Caltech. He was a couple of
years ahead of me, and I kind of apprenticed myself
to him to learn about the equipment side of the
business, working with lunar observations. And
then when he went to MIT, I spent another year
finishing up my thesis, and he offered me a
postdoctoral position at MIT. OK, how long did you
keep this postdoc, and what did you do? Well, what
we worked on during that period of time, the period
was 1969 until about 1971. So it was a little over a
year and a half at MIT. And during that period, we
worked on a number of interesting things,
extending the spectrophotometric studies we've
been doing to Saturn satellites. and the rings of
Saturn, and to asteroids. And there were a lot of
people that are major players in that game that
were students of Tom's and that I worked with.
Clark Chapman was doing asteroid
spectrophotometry. And let's see, I was trying to
think. Gloria Lubofsky was doing a lot of stuff on
the rings of Saturn at that time. And I got involved
with both of those partially kind of helping bring
them along with using the equipment and data
reduction and so forth in the same way that Tom had
helped me. What did you do after that post-doc?
Well, times were tough then. If you remember, in
1970, 71, we were hitting the big post-Apollo
downswing, and academic positions were as scarce
as hen's teeth. And so I started looking around,
getting my resume out. I actually looked at taking
a job with... what became the, you know, there was
an environmental office that was set up back then.
I've even forgotten what they called it. I went
down to Washington to interview with those guys.
And I went out to, I wrote to JPL for one of these NRC,
National Research Council, postdoctoral
positions, which were postdoctoral but paid a lot
better than the academic postdoc positions at
that time. So ultimately I ended up doing a NRC
postdoc at JPL and getting involved in some
research at JPL that then led to getting a job offer
at JPL when that ran out. What did you do with that
NRC thing? How long was it and what did you do? I
think that was a period of two years. I'd have to
check. Let's see. I just got my 20th year pin at JPL.
So I was, I guess, officially hired in around
December of 93. So it was a two year. 73. I'm sorry.
So I must have been hired in December of 73. And so it
was a two year postdoctoral thing. And during that
period of time, we started doing, I worked a bit
with Dennis Madsen on infrared studies of
asteroids. And one of the major studies that we
started at that point was doing a little bit of
laboratory work, which I hadn't done before.
Frasier Finale was at JPL. And he and I started
doing some of the first spectral observations of
meteorite samples to see if we could explain the
properties of these very dark, spectrally
featureless asteroids that we were beginning to
come up with from Chapman's spectrophotometric
survey. Now, you've been at JPL since then until
today, and just in general, what have you been
doing the last 20 years? Well, let's see. I guess
during my general tenure at JPL, things have kind
of split into two general areas. One of them is
continuation of telescopic research, and the
other is spacecraft
instrumentation and experiments in about equal
measure.
Over the years at JPL, we've continued to work on
spectral imaging techniques on everything from
lunar things to spacecraft images from Voyager
and Galileo.
In the last decade or so, we've gotten quite
involved in infrared astronomy of Jupiter's
satellite Io. After we discovered the volcanoes
on Io with Voyager, we realized that we probably
had all along been seeing the infrared signature
of those volcanoes in the ground-based infrared
data on Io and set up a program to monitor and
measure the heat energy coming from Io. So I worked
on the Voyager imaging team through all of its
encounters with Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, and
Neptune, and I got involved in the mid-'70s with a
lot of NASA studies on future missions,
particularly to the Jupiter system, as a result of
the work that I'd done. Don Hunton had a committee
on atmospheric entry probes that I was a member of,
and then I was a member of... Jim Van Allen's
committee, which ultimately recommended the
Jupiter Orbiter Probe Mission, which became the
Galileo Mission. And after that got started, I
became the project scientist on that, which has
sort of occupied me since 1978, about half of my
time, more or less. Okay, now I'm going to switch
the subject. Do you consider planetary
astronomy, or planetary science, I realize that
some people make a difference, but I'll call it
planetary astronomy...
Is it part of astronomy, in your opinion? Some of it
is parts of astronomy. I think it is almost
becoming a separate discipline in itself in the
sense of the study of planets involving a lot of the
major physical and even biological sciences
directed toward studies in the planetary
context. When you started in this game in the 60s,
and early 70s, did you feel second rate compared
to, quote, real, unquote, astronomers like the
ones at Caltech and Palomar models? We had a lot of
that type of feeling. At Caltech, it was a little
bit more like the traditional
frictions between the messier sciences like
chemistry and geology compared to the purer
sciences like astronomy, mathematics, and
physics. And I think those of us that worked for
Bruce, we didn't feel second rate, but we knew that
a lot of the real astronomers felt that we were
second rate. I think we felt a bit more like
Mavericks. We knew we were good. We knew we were
applying techniques that had never been applied
to interesting problems before. It was kind of
interesting. You'd run into people on the
mountain. You're doing something, and they'd
say, what, you're doing that on a planet? And you'd
describe your equipment to them, and by God, your
equipment and the techniques you were using would
be better than what they were using. So it was a fair
amount of cross-fertilization. Mostly, I'd say
the rivalry was more friendly than not. You
think... Do you think today that planetary
astronomy and planetary astronomers are
accepted by other astronomers or do you think
they're still considered a little second rate
because they're not megaparsecs away? I think
there's always, I think they're more accepted. I
think there's a lot less of why are you looking at a
planet? Why are you even worried about it? We used
to get those questions. Some of that was just
ignorance and compartmentalization amongst the
pure astronomers. I think there was a lot of
feeling that with the discovery of Pluto and a few
of these other things that it was sort of like the
field had been put to bed. We knew about the
planets. They were close and so forth. And I think
that feeling went away gradually and probably not
gone completely at the moment with the
discoveries that were made by the spacecraft and
ground-based astronomy in the last 20 years,
revitalizing a field. It's a bit like celestial
mechanics. I mean, I always felt celestial
mechanics was a dead field until people like Peter
Golreich started playing games, and now chaos is
big in it. I mean, it's bigger than it was when
Descartes and those guys were working on things.
There actually is some stuff that Laplace or
Lagrange didn't discover.
Could you take a minute or two and just give me your
subjective opinion of how planetary astronomy
has changed from when you began in it to now?
Obvious things like size, for example. Well,
there are Size is the thing that comes to mind,
particularly sitting here at the DPS meeting, is
that there's just a massive amount more people
working in the field. And I think this mimics the
growth of astronomy out of phase by maybe a few
decades also, is that when the DPS started and when
I began in the field, you could... literally fit
most of the planetary astronomy and planetary
geologists, if you wanted to, you know, around the
table in a relatively large room. And now the hotel
is overflowing with people all working in the
area. That's been one of the changes. I think the
other change is the diversity of techniques being
applied these days, all the way from X-ray to
X-band, if you will. A lot of things that were just
dreams that we had, and considering things that we
might apply to planetary studies, in the 60s are
absolutely routine now. Super high-resolution
spectroscopy, infrared imaging. Spacecraft are
the obvious things. Spacecraft make big
breakthrough sets of observations. There's no
other way to make. But even amongst the techniques
used in near-Earth space and ground-based, I
think that I'm kind of overwhelmed by the number of
different clever ideas theoretically and
experimentally that people were applying to the
problem these days. Do you ever get annoyed when
some popular level book claims that space probes
discovered everything we know about the solar
system? I tell you, we fought that with the press on
Voyager so hard and with so little success. It was
extremely frustrating because Most of the people
on the science teams on Voyager were well aware
that they were standing on the shoulders of a
generation or two of people looking and studying
these things from the ground and the theoretical
underpinnings. Perhaps the most egregious
example of that is the business of water ice in the
outer solar system, which was... hinted at very
strongly in work back in the 50s done by Kuiper and
others, a simple one and two broadband IR
observation showing that the reflectance of the
satellites was very low and hints that the albedos
of the satellites were very high, although the
issue of the albedos, of course, was
controversial because we didn't have good radii.
But, you know, by the early 70s, the ground-based
spectra were incontrovertible. Water ice
existed in the outer solar system on most of these
surfaces. We began to get a few good radii. The
albedos were high. This was established context
by the time Voyager visited the Galilean
satellites in 79, and yet to this day you still see
after Voyager got there, we then knew that there
was water ice on the surface of these things. And
Everybody who talked with the press from the
science community always kept making that point.
But it's a cultural thing, and you're probably
aware of this in the work that you've done. Well,
hi, Spinrad. And Toby and I get a big bang out of
Viking discovered, or whatever, Mariner
discovered water on Mars. But the best one was when
Viking 1 lander landed, there was a headline in a
Houston paper, one of the Houston papers. It said,
Viking proves Mars is red. And Andy Young was so mad
that he wrote off a letter. He says, well, why
didn't they say Viking proves grass is green or
something like that? I'm surprised at that from
Andy, what he should have said. Viking didn't
prove Mars was red, and it isn't anyway.
What's the best piece of work you've done, in your
opinion? Oh, Lord, that's I've worked on a number
of things. I think in terms of sort of team science,
I'm proudest of having worked to get what I think
are much better observations of the satellites
throughout the history of the Voyager mission
than would have been done if we hadn't had myself
and a lot of other good people working very hard to
get good satellite observations. These things
are quite difficult to plan in detail and take a lot
of hard work. In terms of specific scientific type
things, I feel myself quite attached to Io and the
way Carl maybe feels himself attached to Mars. And
I think that my efforts over the years have done a
lot toward illuminating what's really going on on
Io, although nobody would pretend to really
understand it now. The work I've done with Dennis
Mattson trying to understand the heat flow from
Iowa I think is perhaps some of the most
fundamental work on that. Where do you get your
ideas on what to do? Is it because NASA puts out a
request for proposals to study EO or is it because
you have an idea that you think you want to do? In
your personal experience, what's the mix there?
My personal experience is that it's almost
entirely internally driven, but that's because
the environment, at least up until the current
moment, has allowed that. In other words, we've
been fortunate to be in a situation where we can
come up with interesting concepts in planetary
science, and there is, in fact, the structure of
interest at NASA and other funding agencies to
pursue that. we haven't had to go out and look to
find exactly what they're interested in in order
to get the funding. And that started as my tenure at
Caltech was
supported. You're talking about the meteorites.
Reminded me of the...
Reminded me of the... The first asteroid that we
got a really good spectrum of that had a really good
absorption band in it was Vesta. And it's still the
most pronounced absorption band on any asteroid
that was observed. And I think it probably holds
the record for the fastest identification of any
planetary piece of remote spectral sensing. And
the reason is it happened right after the first
Apollo sample returns. And the data from the Vesta
run, which I'd been involved in, Lebowski, MJ
Elias, and a few other people, along with Tom
McCord, was wrapped up on tape and waiting,
sitting at MITPAL at MIT, the Planetary Astronomy
Lab. And Tom was off working with their initial
sample returns with John Adams, taking spectra,
the return samples, comparing it with lunar
samples. And we had in hand right at that time, we
talked to some of my older colleagues who dealt
with headquarters and the government in the
pre-Apollo era, in the Apollo era. I think you'll
find a slightly different tinge, at least
anecdotally. People felt that a lot of the people
at NASA were not well-trained in their fields and
didn't know what good science were. By the time I
was interacting with them, partially as a result
of criticisms like that from the Academy and other
places, the people at headquarters who actually
were involved in directing the programs
connected with planetary work I feel were in fact,
well equipped to discern what was good and were
working very hard to develop peer review
techniques and so forth. That doesn't mean
everything went swimmingly, but I didn't run into
the types of things that I at least heard stories
about, like somebody in there had been trained as
an agronomist or something like that who was
suddenly trying to make a whole bunch of decisions
about what instruments should go on some Mars
mission. There have been three big funding
crunches in NASA's history. One was the one you
referred to earlier, 1973 or so. There was another
one around 81 or 82, and it looks like we're going to
get another one right now. What effect does this
have on the field, and in particular on the younger
guys who don't have a reputation yet? Well, the
80-81 crunch was basically, I believe,
coincident with the Nixon administration and the
Reagan administration coming in. And some of the
feeling on the part of some of the parts of that
administration that NASA was either irrelevant
or science was. I'm not sure which. which
gradually worked its way out, but the emphasis on
the shuttle was very strong then. The shuttle was
having problems. I was not personally affected
too badly by that in my professional career in the
sense that we had to worry about not getting
funded. We were in the midst of trying to get
Galileo built at that time. The way we were
affected was that it had a tremendously negative
effect on the long-term stretch out of the Galileo
program. The shuttle should have been flying in
the early 80s, and it wasn't. And that affected
Galileo and all subsequent planetary and space
missions. So the 80s were a continual struggle, if
you will, to play catch up from that. And given that
those stretch outs cost large amounts of money,
the money available for research outside of the
mission areas also decreased during that period
of time. And that's where you first started
feeling that there was a tremendous pressure on
some of the younger people in the field. It became
very difficult then and has remained difficult to
get permanent positions. A lot of people have been
in rotating post-doctoral positions and
unsolved money positions even when they do get a
job. uh it's been said that every year the dps got
lots of young eager faces at it but um somebody else
also remarked that well they're not all the same
eager faces and they're all looking for a job and uh
that that's been kind of a pattern since that
period in the early 80s in my my impression uh if a
sharp person who just got their bachelor's degree
came up to you and said gee i really want to be a
planetary astronomer what would you say to him or
her I guess my first-order response would be a
relatively elitist one. There's always room at
the top. If that's what you're really interested
in and you're good, you can find a place. That
doesn't mean it's the best place to make a career,
best place to make money. There might be something
the person is equally interested in. Well, of
course, it's a similar situation to the one that
astronomers in general went for 100 years. There
were very few jobs in astronomy, and of course,
about the money crunch before there was the
shuttle, Apollo was the villain, and now it's the
space station, and there's always something. So
that part at least is constant. If you listen to the
tenor of the discussions at NASA night here at the
DPS, I don't see any, the names have changed and
some of the issues have changed, but the general
tenor of the discussions sound an awful lot like
the ones I heard back in the 70s. Where do you think
planetary astronomy today would be without
NASA's money? the stuff it's given over the last 30
years or so. Well, I think that goes back to your
point about the way planetary astronomy was
viewed in the previous decades. I think it would be
a relatively small offshoot of, if you quote Will,
regular astronomy, dealing with global
properties of objects and occasional
curiosities, such as Io or the rotation of
Mercury. I think the infusion of support for
studying the solar system that started with the
Apollo program and NASA and, well, the space
program generally. I mean, starting with
Sputnik, really, if you want to put it that way. By
the way, my high school career was altered
somewhat by what was an old Title IV funds
post-Sputnik. You know, we got to get, you know,
better scientists. We got good equipment, and I
got more interested in physics as a result of that
type of thing. But I don't think there would be a
field of planetary astronomy or planetary
science as we know it today other than without
NASA's infusion of resources. There would
probably be a single faculty member or maybe two
faculty members in a couple of the larger
departments dealing with this, more or less as it
was back in the 50s and 40s. Today, the Division for
Planetary Sciences of the American Astronomical
Society exists, and it has an official journal,
namely Icarus. Are these two developments good,
bad, inevitable? What's your feelings? I think
you've got to put it in the context of what was
happening generally in the 60s and 70s as they
developed this entire field of planetary
studies, and I won't restrict it strictly to
planetary astronomy. There was a feeling in a
number of the classical professional societies
that they needed to take account of this
discipline in some way. And this was done in a
number of different ways. In the astronomy
community, the Division for Planetary Science
was formed. Some of the same players were
responsible for forming a section in the American
Geophysical Union. NASA has a journal called JGR
Planets. Yes, a piece of the traditional JGR
journal. The GSA did something similar, but not
Geological Society of America, which was not
quite as autonomous. Each one of these responses
was a little different. The Division for
Planetary Sciences and the AAS rapidly became
almost entirely autonomous from the AAS. It, in
effect, is a separate society, in my opinion.
Whereas in the American Geophysical Union, the
planetology section remains a relatively small
but active section within the union as a whole and
has its sessions with the major meeting of the AGU.
It's not an autonomous thing. I think that's the
same pattern as the GSA also. I think all of these
activities were a logical response to the number
of people and the number of ideas working in the
field. Just to stick in yet a third thing that I've
kind of looked at over the years, there was
a major perturbation and difficulty with trying
to figure out where the tremendous amount of
information developed from the Apollo samples
the geochemistry and the subsequent work on
meteorites should go in all of this. If you go back
to the early days of 69 and the Apollo era, A lot of
the early results were presented at AGU meetings
and DPS meetings. In fact, some of those people
were founders. Ed Anders was our second
president, I believe, of the DPS, or chairman of
the DPS. And Anders and the people working in
geochemistry haven't been involved in detail
with DPS for many years since then. What happened
was that as a result of the Apollo sample
studies, there in effect grew up a society without
a society, which was the Lunar Planetary Science
Conference down at Houston. It started out as the
Lunar Science Conference, and it started out
strictly as a meeting of the PIs on the Apollo
program. And that's grown into yet another
different accommodation for communication in
this area. The Meteoritical Society has a similar
type of role. So you rarely see much rock and
meteorite work presented at the DPS or the AGU
anymore. These other areas tend to have subsumed
that function. So the fractionation continues.
Well, I think the fractionation existed by 1972
and hasn't changed too much since then, although
the boundaries of these Venn diagrams overlap.
People work on doing joint sessions successfully
sometimes, and there are a number of parts of the
community that tend to go to two or more of these
types of meetings. Do you have much contact with
astronomers who work on stars, galaxies, and
things like that? Very little, and I think that's
one of the negative effects of this
fractionation, as you will. In the early days of my
career, I went to AAS meetings occasionally when
they had sessions on planetary astronomy, and I
felt that was quite valuable, particularly in
terms of changing information about techniques
and so forth of observing. But with the growth of
these other things in the types of areas that I'm
working in, there are two AGU meetings per year, a
DPS meeting, a lunar meeting, to say nothing of
international meetings. And to try to also, and
I've drifted more into, if you will, the
geophysical side of some of these things rather
than the pure observational astronomy. So I've
tended to put the weight of where I operate more on
that side, and it's taken me more away from
astronomy in a pure astronomical sense. Do you
think the fact that there's now a lot of interest
among stellar astronomers in formation of other
solar systems offers a chance to maybe bring at
least those people and DPS types together? I think
we've already seen a bit of that. The fact that we
don't actually have another solar system yet
identified to form the nucleus or focus of a new
field of studying extrasolar solar systems has
limited that, but at a number of major meetings
over the years, in the past few years, we've seen
people of both of those disciplines coming
together to worry about this problem. I kind of see
this as a cyclic type of thing in history, and I
think that the information and the techniques of
stellar astronomy are now to the point where They
are gathering data and the theoretical
constructs are beginning to become available
that are now relevant to really planetary issues
in other solar systems. I don't think that will
actually happen in a major way until one or more
real extrasolar systems are identified and we
actually have some physical data on one or more
planets that aren't in the solar system. You were
saying that there was a lot of talk and discussion
about voluntary types splitting off from the AAS.
Would you continue to do that? I was the secretary
treasurer of the DPS for a term back in the 70s. I've
forgotten the exact years of my office and got
involved in a lot of the council meetings and so
forth and the DPS committee meetings. And there
were at least a couple of cycles that I remember not
too clearly as to exact dates where the membership
proposed that it might be a good idea to split away
from the AAS entirely. And the options were
usually form a separate society, get involved
with some other society, such as the GSA or the AGU,
Geological Society of America. And those, I
believe that those discussions were fueled by a
number of different parallel types of problems.
One of them had to do with sort of logistics,
whether we were being well served by the parent
organization in terms of where our dues were
going, what we were getting for it other than
getting abstract published in the BAAS. and
whether the discipline was relevant enough to the
AAS. The other, if you will, more intellectually
reputable point of view, I think, was that the
society, the DPS at that time, was already...
drawing a broader community of people to its
meetings than astronomers. There are a lot of
people who didn't feel themselves to be
astronomers. They'd come out of geology
departments like myself. I never felt
particularly strongly about that. I felt that it
was more a matter of pragmatic convenience as to
where a good place for professional society to be
was. There are also issues about the journal, and I
think that probably people that were involved
with the genesis of the relationship of the DPS to
ICRIS could tell you more about that. But there was
a major stumbling block, if you will, I think, in
the early days is that the membership of the DPS
didn't feel that the AAS journals were serving
their interest. This is a problem that you
mentioned, the AGU. In fact, a similar set of
discussions has led very recently to the
formation of a section of the Journal of
Geophysical Research devoted to planets because
it was felt that that would better serve the
membership that was interested in planetary
science. Whether that works or not remains to be
seen. Do you think planetary astronomers have
done a good job of selling themselves, A, to the
public, and B, to the United States Congress?
Well, I don't know in terms of selling themselves.
Again, I tend to review these things more in the
context of science as a political and policy issue
within the government as a whole. I think in terms
of catching public interest and having Congress
sympathetic to the types of research we're doing,
we have a slightly easy job, actually. I think that
people relate to the exploration motif and
looking at new worlds They also relate to
discovering things about black holes. I think you
can get too far over on this. If it's not relevant to
me today to exploit for some sort of economic
benefit, it isn't going to interest Congress, it
isn't going to interest the public. I find the
exact opposite. And I think that it's sort of
interesting in some way that our relativistic
astrophysicists find themselves in a position of
being, it's as easy to get the public interested in
their thing as it is interested in a lunar base,
which you might think is much more relevant to a lot
of people's thoughts. From your experiences,
from the general public you've met, what do they
think of planetary astronomy? Practically
everybody I've ever met in a social context that
was reasonably well-educated has been very
interested in it. They find out you're an
astronomer, find out you work with planets. You
always get lots of questions, very eager
questions, some of them naive, some of them
somewhat ignorant. And occasionally they,
what's your sign? Did you say you were working in
astrology? Type of questions. I find that the
educated public in general very interested in
that. I've rarely gotten an extremely hostile
response as, you know, what the hell are you
wasting the government's money with that for? I
think a lot of people are worried and frequently
misinformed about the total amount of money we
spend on these types of things. I think that's one
of the problems that science and basic science in
general have, that they see the shiny rockets out
on the launch pads and think that a large fraction
of the national treasury must be pouring into
those things to satisfy our curiosity. And, of
course, these programs are substantial, but
they're nowhere near up in even the top five or six
government spending categories. Most people
don't realize that, but as taxpayers, they're
concerned about whether we're doing the right
thing. I frequently get questioned about that,
usually in a fairly non-confrontational way. Do
you think the spectacular results that we've
gotten out of the solar system in the last 30 or 40
years, do you think that's really changed the way
anybody thinks about anything?
That's more of a question for a sociologist or
anthropologist. I think it has. I think everybody
now relates to the Earth as a whole picture as seen
by Apollo pictures and other pictures, you know, a
globe. I think that if you just think about... If
you show a picture of an object to somebody now with
a bunch of impact craters in it, people understand
the impacts of... bodies into other bodies over
4.6 billion years is something that's happened.
Most people that are involved with following
science and astronomy at all sort of have that in
their background knowledge now. Back in the 50s
and 60s, you probably couldn't find one person in a
thousand that knew that the holes in the moon were
created by meteorites slamming into them or
asteroid or cometary debris. And at that time,
people didn't even really know the length of time
or the time scales that these things had been done
over. I think there's a tremendous amount of
shared knowledge about our history in the solar
system that has crept into the public
consciousness without anybody really noticing
it. It's not just a matter of flashy pictures in the
textbooks. How much, if any, negative effect on
public interest and public funding of planetary
astronomy
How much of a negative impact on those two things do
you think our failure to find any evidence of life
anywhere else in the solar system except
particularly not on Mars has had? I think that's
been overblown a bit, just as I felt that the
original raison d'etre of Mars exploration being
nothing but the search for life was also
overblown. I think people are somewhat
disappointed, but I think that in fact, again, in
terms of this kind of shared cultural knowledge of
where we are, who we are, and what the solar system
is, they now know that there aren't little green
men on Mars, and they're not... Most of them. Most
of them do. The others are uneducable, so
that's... And I think people were disappointed,
but... I think that's taking the universe as it is,
rather than wanting it to be the way somebody might
make it. I think that
interest, if you will, the interest that was
wrapped up in the search for life on Mars now has
shifted to perhaps more subtle problems of the
history of life on the Earth, the effects of impact
on evolution on the Earth. the origins of life
itself in terms of the chemistry brought in by
comets and impacting debris, and the possibility
of there having been false starts at getting life
going in other environments, looking for fossils
on Mars, if you will. I find people still very
interested in these things, interested in the
concept of other worlds and other solar systems
beyond the solar system that might harbor life
Quite frankly, I don't think I've ever had anybody
come up to me and say, the solar system, the
planetary program should be shut down now. We know
there isn't life on Mars. That's all we were doing
it for. I never really run into much of that
reaction. Looking at your crystal ball a minute,
what do you see for the future of planetary
astronomy and planetary science for the next 10
years or so? I think it's in a mode of
consolidation. Now, right at the moment, you
could say we're in a... You could be very negative
right at the moment. I personally feel the
situation with respect to leadership in
Washington at this instant is quite bad. I don't
think that the right resources... I don't think
we've got realism in the resources and
constraints and plans for planetary work. But I
also think there's a very large... a base of firm
understanding of what we should be doing that will
carry the country through to a reasonable
continuity ultimately. And what I see is sort of
consolidation. I see a lot of work exploiting what
we can do from the ground and from Earth-based
astronomy, that's Earth orbital astronomy. That
has really grown. It's easier to do than the big
major outer planets missions. I see that there's
the emphasis on small missions. I think we are
going to have more small missions. I think that
they're not going to be as mind-blowing and
revealing as a few of the big missions have been,
but they're going to be addressing very relevant,
very interesting questions. We'll be able to deal
with that. So I think if you think about it in DPS
context, we're going to have a lot of
nitty-gritty, hard science returns from a number
of ways and fewer of the big breakthroughs, oh, we
never knew that that was going on there again. But I
think that's inevitable with the maturing of any
field is that... I've always liked a comment that
Carl Sagan made many years ago, is you only explore
the solar system for the first time once. So you
don't think the field is mined out by any extent?
Oh, no, no. Any more than the field of geology was
mined out in the 19th century. Last few years,
there's been a lot of attention and certainly a lot
of publicity directed towards making planetary
astronomy practical. And I think things like
ozone layer studies... global warming, killer
asteroids and comets. Do you think that's been
overdone, or do you think we ought to do everything
we can? Or do you think if it's good science, so what
if it gets publicity? Your personal opinion. I
think we ought to let people know what's relevant
about our science. You always face the issue of
over-hyping something and getting out on a limb
and stating things that are really warped in terms
of their perspective. Not true. In the worst case,
actually, you know, dropping into charlatanism,
trying to sell something on a flashy basis that has
no substance. I would not accuse... anybody of
that in a major way in the instances you just
measured. I believe there's a firm basis to most of
those types of studies, which is important to
people.